I remember the first time I heard my mom play the piano--her hands flying across the keys, striking every note with perfect accuracy. Struck with awe, my three-year-old self insisted on learning the piano, not realizing that what I had heard was the result of years of hard work and practice. I soon became frustrated, as piano did not come naturally to me. It took me two months to learn the notes of “Mary Had a Little Lamb,” and I was discouraged that my playing came out uneven and slow...
Despite this initial setback, I pushed myself to continue learning the piano. The thought of giving up never crossed my mind. As I began to play more advanced pieces, my appreciation for both music and practicing the instrument grew. What used to be a tedious activity became a way to express my emotions. When I am frustrated, the chords of Rachmaninoff’s Prelude in C# Minor thunder throughout the house. When I am happy, Gigue from Bach’s fifth French Suite rings across the room. When no piece in my repertoire can properly express my emotions, a simple improvisation resonates from the living room. Throughout my years of playing piano, I have played countless pieces ranging from the Baroque period to the 20th century, from Bach to Copland. I felt the power of music, a feeling of satisfaction and achievement that overwhelms me, and a sense of wonder in my ability to master any piece.
As I continued playing piano in high school, I was introduced to the world of computer science when my friend gave me his old Python textbook. The first time I printed “hello world,” I felt that same power in my hands. Similar to piano, I had romanticized the idea of programming. Although I didn’t enjoy reading the textbook, the rush of satisfaction from successfully completing practice problems reminded me of piano. This nostalgia pushed me to finish the textbook, and I eventually found my passion in the subject itself.
During my junior year, I furthered my interest by enrolling in AP Computer Science and joining programming-related clubs. Whether it was coding for a competition, automating a robot, or innovating a biological pipeline, I was always captivated by the logical thinking and problem-solving skills it required. As I applied this logic to other subjects, I found that it broadened my view of the knowledge I learned from school. I gained a greater appreciation for math, as writing it into my code allowed me to view it from a new perspective. During my internship at the Yu Lab, I was amazed at how biology research could be done in a computational context. Theoretical or applied, computer science has never failed to fascinate me.
Although I was introduced to computer science much later than piano, it feels like I have known it for just as long. Through programming, I experience the same feeling of joy and accomplishment as I do through the piano. Debugging a script until it works is practicing a section until it is perfect. Executing it flawlessly is finally playing through a polished piece. Presenting my summer research is playing in a recital. Whether there are eighty-eight or one hundred four keys, my fingers strike them with equal fluency.
Throughout high school, my love for the piano fueled my passion for computer science. As I learned programming through the lens of a pianist, I learned that passion can stem from similarities in unlikely combinations. Computer science became the perfect blend between Rachmaninoff’s Prelude and Bach’s Gigue; logic and problem-solving; frustration then satisfaction. I know that I wouldn’t be the same programmer, or pianist, without both sets of keys.